# [About the Edition](#about-the-edition)

This is an introduction to _The Digital 'Anon'_ as an edition, to the documents it presents, and to the editorial and curatorial history of those documents, which are housed in the New York Public Library's Henry W. and Albert A. Berg Collection of English and and American Literature. For more about the thematics and the narratives of these documents, see [About the Drafts](LINK).

**Contents**

- [About the Edition](#about-the-edition)
  - [What's in a Name?](#whats-in-a-name)
  - [Documenting Anon](#documenting-anon)
    - [Handwritten Drafts](#handwritten-drafts)
    - [Typewritten Drafts](#typewritten-drafts)
  - [Editing Anon](#editing-anon)
    - [Bibliography](#bibliography)

___

## [What's in a Name?](#whats-in-a-name)

What do we talk about when we talk about 'Anon'? The scholarly community has come to know these drafts by the dual title of 'Anon' and 'The Reader'. The Berg Collection, where the documents are housed, has sorted the drafts into 'Anon' fragments and 'Reader' fragments, and the 1979 Brenda Silver edition uses the same titles, presenting two separate essays with these titles. But Woolf did not often use these titles to refer to her literary-historical project. Woolf uses the title 'Anon' to refer to the first chapter of her literary history relatively often, but uses the title 'The Reader' less so – only three times, in early manuscript drafts ([M1–8, 5 of 10. The Reader...](LINK), [M1-8, 8 of 10. The Reader...](LINK), and [M1-8, 9 of 10. The Reader...](LINK)). Given that she uses the title so infrequently, and that the two sets of documents overlap so frequently, in both general narrative and specific wording, I am sceptical as to whether there is an identifiable textual entity called 'The Reader' at all.

What did Woolf call her literary history? She gave her project a number of different names over the years. At times, she refers to it as a Common History or a third volume of _The Common Reader_ (the first and second having been published in 1925 and 1932, respectively). But she also refers to the project as either 'Reading at Random' or 'Turning the Page'. She uses these two titles in her earliest reading notebooks for the project, and they appear on the three Lifeguard Multigrip folders that the loose leaf pages of draft material were stored in when they acceded to the Berg. We cannot know what Woolf might have called her literary history had she lived to finish it. Her titles often change from draft to published work – for example, "Melymbrosia" becomes _The Voyage Out_, "The Hours" becomes _Mrs Dalloway_ and "Pointz Hall" becomes _Between the Acts_. But most readers of Woolf know these essay drafts through the Silver edition, and to date they have quoted and cited essays with these titles. Calling this edition _The Digital 'Anon'_ becomes a way to acknowledge this long history of archival and editorial labour, scholarship, and citation.
___

## [Documenting Anon](#documenting-anon)

Virginia Woolf never finished the literary history whose drafts this edition presents. Had she done so, this edition would look very different – if it existed at all. This is not to say that she did not write extensively, however. Woolf wrote some 273 pages of draft material, though these drafts are stubbornly non-sequential: they mirror and repeat and echo one another, circling back time and again as Woolf drafts and redrafts, writes and rewrites, conceptualises and reconceptualises the primal scenes of English literary history. As such, there is no one single document that we can say best represents Woolf's intent as author (if such an analytic is even particularly useful), or a text we can read as a reasonably final draft. Instead, we are left with a rich panoply of variant draft fragments, each of which asks to be read as a distinct entity.

### [Handwritten Drafts](#handwritten-drafts)

There are some 43 separate, identifiable drafts in this corpus of documents. These are interwoven with one another textually and thematically, and interlinked with other, contemporaneous works Woolf was writing at the time. The earliest writing that this edition presents is her notebook titled ["Reading at Random or Turning the Page / Notes."](LINK). This is a handmade notebook made from scrap paper (curiously, the ragged, cut edge is at the top of the book and not to the side), which Woolf dated 18 September 1940. Woolf writes the next drafts in another handmade notebook, the eighth and final of a series of notebooks she had kept for much of her working life, titled 'Articles, Essays, Fiction and Reviews'. As the title suggests, this notebook series is dedicated for the most part to drafts of shorter pieces of factual writing and to short stories. The ten drafts of her literary history in this notebook, some titled explicitly titled either 'Anon' or 'The Reader', jostle alongside one another and her other writings. These fragments are sequenced as M.1–8, 1 of 10, M.1–8, 2 of 10, and so on. Woolf saved paper by rotating her notebooks 180 degrees and writing on the verso side (the back) of her previous drafts, upside down — when a document description uses the phrase 'In back', it refers to a draft written on the verso in this manner. These drafts vividly depict Woolf trying to think through the beginnings of a literary history premised on an oral ballad tradition which is, by its very nature, unrecordable, and the demise of that tradition, first as Caxton brings print technology to Britain and then as modern reading practices emerge. In particular, documents such as [M.1–8, 2 of 10. Anon. Holograph...](LINK) and [M.1-8, 7 of 10 [The Reader: If you have read this brittle & imperfect sketch]. Holograph...](LINK) show Woolf thinking with her pen, and show that this was not an easy task.

Woolf's later drafts were written on loose leaf paper, some handwritten (holograph) and some typed (typescript). The handwritten, loose leaf drafts correspond to M.45–M.47. Only [M.45. Anon. Holograph fragment...](LINK) is explicitly titled 'Anon', and it is one of two drafts to be dated — both this and [M.53. Anon. Typescript fragment...](LINK) are dated 24 November 1940. Despite this, identifying where one handwritten draft ends and another begins is relatively straightforward: the sheets of M.45 are pierced through by the prongs of one of Woolf's Multigrip binders (see below), while the first and final sheets of [M.46 [Anon: He has emerged then sufficiently from the undifferentiated voices of birds...]. Holograph fragment...](LINK) both have visible traces of paperclip rust. Meanwhile [M.47 [Anon: For why a gods name. Holograph fragment...]](LINK) is the only fragment written on a cornflower blue paper stock. In these documents, Woolf writes the birth of Anon in the primeval forests of early Britain and another beginning as Spenser pauses on the threshold of Penshurst, the great house of his patron Sir Philip Sidney, struggling to think reflexively about his medium — in so doing, he brings about the beginnings of English poetic language.

### [Typewritten Drafts](#typewritten-drafts)

Woolf then begins to type her drafts. M48–M53 tend to read as though they are typed-up second drafts of earlier handwritten manuscripts, but tend to spiral in different directions. These documents are easier to read – Woolf was not the best typist, as is evidenced by her manifold typos, marked in red in the transcriptions – but harder to date. The first editor of the drafts, Brenda Silver inferred the order in which they were typed from the slow fading of Woolf's typewriter ribbon (Silver 363-4; I discuss Silver's edition in more detail below). On this basis, and on the basis of other internal evidence, the curators at the Berg Collection divided Woolf's typescripts up into sequences of separate documents. I have followed this division and sequencing for the most part, save for the case of M.54. As catalogued, this is somewhat of a composite document, and somewhat of a jumble, but I have been able to break it down into eleven separate sub-fragments. My sub-division is based on stylistics and thematics, Woolf's own (albeit inconsistent) page numbering, and the fading of Woolf's typewriter ribbon — typewriter ribbons wear out and the ink grows fainter with use.

The 'Reader' drafts are catalogued as M.108–M.113. Woolf writes these later than she does the 'Anon' drafts: the ink is darker because she changes her typewriter ribbon between drafting M.54, 11 of 11 and M.108. She also begins to reuse paper from other projects with much more regularity as wartime shortages began to bite. She most frequently reuses old pages from typescripts of _Between the Acts_, though [M.109 [The Reader: At what point in Elizabethan drama...]...](LINK) begins with a page from her essay 'Mrs Thrale' (1941; _Essays_ 6 292-297), published less than two weeks after her death, and [M113 [The Reader: This brittle and imperfect sketch...]...](LINK) has is interwoven with a draft of 'The Legacy' (_CSF_ 281-7) as well as containing pages of _Between the Acts_. In some cases, these interwoven drafts interact with one another as Woolf begins to write back to her own previous writing, commenting or expanding upon it. Phillips (2022) discusses one page from [M.111, set 3 of 3 [The Reader: Anonymity was a great possession]...](LINK) where Woolf seems to use her earlier draft of _Between the Acts_ as a springboard of sorts to think through the forms of labour that anonymous playwrights, audiences, and readers perform. 

Meanwhile, [TL (typescript letter, fragment) to Ben [Nicolson]](LINK) is an otherwise unpublished draft letter to Benedict Nicolson, Vita Sackville-West's son, with a page of self-reflexive commentary on its back. Nicolson has sent a letter to Woolf castigating Bloomsbury for its insularity and its snobbishness, arguing that the group did nothing to prevent the growth of fascism. Woolf works on a response to Nicolson, and its full draft is published in _Letters_ (6 419–21; No. 3633), before revising the version that she sends quite significantly (_Letters_ 6 421–2, No. 3434). In both the unsent draft published in the _Letters_ and in the typescript reproduced in this edition, Woolf responds to Nicolson's suggestion that Bloomsbury was a 'set of people who sat on the floor at Bernard Street saying "More and more I understand nothing of humanity in the mass" and were content with that' (TL fol. 1r). Woolf defends Fry by pointing out that he had taught 'elementary school children [in] the black country how to draw' and attempted to 'make art enjoyed by the public in Southwark' (TL, fol. 1r). In the draft reproduced in _Letters_, Woolf goes on to point out that she herself had taught at Morley College, a college for working class adults in south London (cf. Daugherty for a fuller account) and that her husband, Leonard, 'spent half his life [trying] to prevent the growth of Nazism; and to create a League of Nations' (420). On the back of this draft of an impassioned defence of her work and those of her closest companions, Woolf begins to write a self-reflexive interrogation of the terms of her own literary history. She argues that it is a 'brittle and imperfect sketch' that gives readers 'nothing of the emotion which is presumably to be found in the books themselves', and that it is 'the critical attitude' itself that 'pinches the mind', as though it is 'in whalebones, like a stays [or] too tight shoes' (TL, fol. 1v). Though we can never know precisely why Woolf chose to write this self-reflexive meditation on the act of criticism on the back of this precise letter draft, it seems entirely plausible that she was actively responding to her earlier draft here.

The form of these documents thus becomes as important as their content, and the editorial principles underpinning this edition are designed to designed to make this form as legible and accessible as possible.
___

## [Editing Anon](#editing-anon)

This is not the first edition of Woolf's unfinished literary-historical project. In 1979, scholar and editor Brenda Silver published an edition of some (though not all) of the material on this website in a special issue of the journal _Twentieth Century Literature_ dedicated to editions of draft Woolf texts. The 1979 edition is very different from the one that you are reading now, both because of the technological constraints of the time and because of changes in editorial practices and priorities in the intervening decades.

The most obvious technological change since 1979 has been the development of the internet, and the infrastructure that allows digital editions like this one to be created and published: these technologies were decades off, and Silver's edition by necessity had to be a print one. As such, it is more selective than this edition, and it prioritises completeness and narrative in a way that this one does not. For instance, I said above that Silver inferred the order in which these drafts were written from the way that Woolf's typewriter ribbon faded. She used this to divide the 'Anon' drafts into three sets of variants, A, B, and C. The 1979 edition presents only the 'C' variants: Silver's argument is that, moreso than the others, this set of documents represents 'the rough draft of a completed and coherent essay' (Silver 'Anon' 363-4). She does likewise with the drafts of 'The Reader', dividing these drafts into six and reproducing draft F in her edition (364). Partly this is due to space: Silver had to fit her edition into the space provided by an academic journal whereas this edition is not constrained in such a way. But, equally, the difference between the 1979 edition and this one stems in no small part from a shift in scholarly priorities.

Silver is open about her intention 'to provide clear texts' of the drafts, which leads her to prioritise later and more developed variations of draft writing, to incorporate marginal additions into the body of her edition's text at the appropriate point, and to correct Woolf's typos (Silver 'Anon' 364–5). She is working, broadly speaking, within a school of editorial thought and practice known as textual scholarship, which was (and remains) prevalent in Anglophone academia. Textual scholarship in this vein stems from the study of Shakespeare and other early modern playwrights, for whose plays there are many and competing early print sources (as in the First Folio version of _Hamlet_ and the so-called 'Bad Quarto' version), but no manuscript versions that survive. The textual scholar collates every version of their chosen text, choosing a 'copy-text' that they view as the most accurate or least corrupted. Comparing that collation to the copy-text, they then work out which variant reading (which might be as small as a letter or as large as an entire soliloquy) is closest to the author's intentions, and amend the copy-text with that variant. By doing this for every single point of variance, they construct what is known as an eclectic edition, one that most closely represents what the author may have intended but which did not exist prior to the editor starting their work. The other variants are relegated to an appendix or textual apparatus, and the reader of an eclectic text can use these variants to reconstruct any edition of the text if she is so minded. Silver worked in this context, and her edition is an eclectic one in that it takes different variants and uses them to construct a version of 'Anon' and one of 'The Reader', one that did not exist before.

Eclectic editing is still common practice, and it has one notable advantage: it prioritises the construction of texts that are readable both by scholars and by non-specialist readers (Norton Critical Editions and Oxford World's Classics editions are constructed in this manner). But it is not the only way to approach text. In a 1991 article, Silver writes about the feminist potential of 'versioning', a paradigm of editing that starts with the decision _not_ to choose between variants but instead to present all versions of a given text, without claiming one as definitive (Silver 'Textual Criticism' 211-2). In some ways, this edition is a versioned edition, in that it presents as many variant documents as possible. It also takes a cue from the school of genetic criticism, which developed in France in the 1970s but only became prevalent in the English-speaking landscape from the late '90s. Genetic criticism is less interested in establishing a single or definitive text, and more so in tracing the development of a literary work from notes to manuscript, manuscript to typescript, typescript to pre-publication documents such as proofs, and then to published text. [_Woolf Online_](http://woolfonline.com) (2013) is an example of a genetic edition which presents the pre-publication archive of _To the Lighthouse_ and its variant first editions. Genetic editions such as this are difficult to accomplish within the confines of a print book: a published edition of Woolf's 1927 novel might conceivably be around 200 pages long, depending on font size and how extensive its introduction and notes are. _Woolf Online_, meanwhile, presents many thousands of facsimile images and their transcriptions, and presenting an array of parallel editions as _The Digital 'Anon'_ does in a print format would be difficult to accomplish, and more still to read.

_The Digital 'Anon'_ presents 273 folios of material in the form of 43 micro-editions, each of which can be read as a separate entity, but which are linked by linguistic and thematic threads. Every page of material has a transcription, and facsimile and transcription are interlinked – a reader can click on a line of transcription to highlight the corresponding portion of the facsimile, and vice versa. These transcriptions are fully searchable. The documents are also linked by a web of glossed terms and explanatory notes, which are highlighted and clickable, as well as being themselves searchable.

This edition, then, would not have been possible in 1979. What kinds of editing and edition might be possible in another 46 years time (I write this in 2025), we cannot know.
___

### Bibliography

Caughie, Pamela L., et al. ‘Woolf Online’. _Woolf Online_, 2013, [http://woolfonline.com](http://woolfonline.com).

Daugherty, Beth Rigel. _Virginia Woolf’s Apprenticeship: Becoming an Essayist_. Edinburgh University Press, 2022.

Phillips, Joshua. ‘How Should One Read “The Reader”? New Approaches to Virginia Woolf’s Late Archive’. _Textual Cultures_, vol. 14, no. 2, 2022, pp. 195–219. Access here: [DOI](https://doi.org/10.14434/tc.v14i2.33658).

Silver, Brenda R. ‘“Anon” and “The Reader”: Virginia Woolf’s Last Essays’. _Twentieth Century Literature_, vol. 25, no. 3/4, 1979, pp. 356–441.

---. ‘Textual Criticism as Feminist Practice: Or, Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf Part II’. _Representing Modernist Texts: Editing as Interpretation_, edited by George Bornstein, University of Michigan Press, 1991, pp. 193–222.

Woolf, Virginia. RN2. [Holograph Reading Notes] Notes for Reading at Random. Holograph Notebook, Dated Sept. 18, 1940. 8p. 1940. Henry W. and Albert A. Berg Collection of English Literature, Berg Coll. MSS Woolf.

---. M.1-8, 2 of 10. Anon. Holograph. In [Articles, Essays, Fiction and Reviews], Vol. 8 [1938-39], Pp. 78-102. 15p. Sep. 1938. Henry W. and Albert A. Berg Collection of English Literature, Berg Coll. MSS Woolf.

---. M.1-8, 5 of 10. The Reader. Holograph. In Back [Articles, Essays, Fiction and Reviews], Vol. 8 [1938-39], Pp. 17-20. 4p. Sep. 1938. Henry W. and Albert A. Berg Collection of English Literature, Berg Coll. MSS Woolf.

---. M1-8, 7 of 10. [The Reader: If you have read this brittle & imperfect sketch...]. Holograph. In Back [Articles, Essays, Fiction and Reviews], Vol. 8 [1938-39], Pp. 27-32. 6p. Sep. 1938. Henry W. and Albert A. Berg Collection of English Literature, Berg Coll. MSS Woolf.

---. M1-8, 8 of 10. The Reader. In Back [Articles, Essays, Fiction and Reviews], Vol. 8 [1938-39], p. 31. 1p. Sep. 1938. Henry W. and Albert A. Berg Collection of English Literature, Berg Coll. MSS Woolf.

---. M1-8, 9 of 10 The Reader. In Back [Articles, Essays, Fiction and Reviews], Vol. 8 [1938-39], Pp. 34-36. 3p. Sep. 1938. Henry W. and Albert A. Berg Collection of English Literature, Berg Coll. MSS Woolf.

---. M.45. Anon. Holograph Fragment, Unsigned, Dated Nov. 24, 1940. 11p. Jan. 1940. Henry W. and Albert A. Berg Collection of English Literature, Berg Coll. MSS Woolf.

---. M.46 [Anon: He has emerged then sufficiently from the undifferentiated voices of birds...]. Holograph Fragment, Undated. 9p. Jan. 1940. Henry W. and Albert A. Berg Collection of English Literature, Berg Coll. MSS Woolf.

---. M.47 [Anon: For why a gods name...]. Holograph Fragments, Undated. Some Pages Paginated 1-3. 11p. Jan. 1940. Henry W. and Albert A. Berg Collection of English Literature, Berg Coll. MSS Woolf.

---. M.109 [The Reader: At what point in Elizabethan drama...]. Typescript, Fragment, with the Author’s Ms. Corrections, Unsigned and Undated. 9p. Jan. 1940. Henry W. and Albert A. Berg Collection of English Literature, Berg Coll. MSS Woolf.

---. M.113 [The Reader: This brittle and imperfect sketch...]. Typescript Fragments, One with the Author’s Ms. Corrections, Unsigned and Undated. 8p. Jan. 1940. Henry W. and Albert A. Berg Collection of English Literature, Berg Coll. MSS Woolf.

---. T.L. (Typescript Draft Letter, Fragment) to Ben [Nicolson]. [Aug. 24, 1940] 1p. On Verso Her [The Reader] Typescript Fragment. 1940. Henry W. and Albert A. Berg Collection of English Literature, Berg Coll. MSS Woolf.

---. _The Letters of Virginia Woolf_. Edited by Nigel Nicolson and Joanne Trautmann Banks, The Hogarth Press, 1975.

---. ‘The Legacy’. _The Complete Shorter Fiction of Virginia Woolf_, edited by Susan Dick, Harcourt, Inc., 1989, pp. 281–87.
